Blockchain and Cryptocurrency Technology Education 2018
=======================================================

Bernard Parenteau

Florida Institute of Technology

bparente\@fit.edu

Bitcoin, Blockchain, and cryptocurrencies have become common terms in
the last few years. They have become the subject of intense interest in
fields from computer science to finance to business and law. Though the
media hype and the prices have waned somewhat since the price spike at
the end of 2017, the interest remains very high among the general public
and in business, particularly financial technology businesses. New
business and development efforts have only accelerated, increasing
demand for people with knowledge in the field. And there is a
corresponding demand to learn about these topics.

But these are complex topics involving a number of technologies and
disciplines that don't necessarily fit into a traditional academic
department. Most universities have not yet incorporated these topics
into their curriculums and there is not a standardized way to do so.

U.S. University Computer Science Curriculums
--------------------------------------------

A number of leading universities have started offering graduate computer
science courses or programs related to cryptocurrency and blockchain
technologies[^1]. Princeton created perhaps the first and best-known
course; "Bitcoin and Cryptocurrency Technologies", which has been
available through Coursera[^2] for years, though not currently offered
at Princeton. The book of the same title[^3] by the course creators has
become the de facto standard text for most introductory computer science
courses on the topics.

Carnegie Mellon offers a special topics course[^4], cross-listed under
Engineering and Public Policy and the Institute for Software Research.
Universities such as Stanford, Johns Hopkins, George Mason and the
University of Maryland have catalog computer science courses in
cryptocurrency and blockchain technologies[^5]^,^ [^6]^,^ [^7]^,^ [^8],
the latter of which is cross-listed in engineering and computer science.
Cornell, M.I.T., and UC Berkeley are leaders in the field as all have
multiple courses and each has a center for related studies.

Joseph Bonneau, who has developed and taught such courses at Princeton
and Stanford, has said "Every university will have a blockchain course
in five years. More institutions would like to each it now, but it's a
question of having a professor around to do it."[^9] A recent conference
with an academic session concluded "Even academics can't keep pace with
blockchain change"[^10].

The progression of blockchain and cryptocurrency technologies in
computer science departments may well be similar to that of data
science, and cybersecurity before that; a special topics course, a
regular catalog course or two, then a specialization certificate and
ultimately a specialized degree program.

U.S. University Business Curriculums
------------------------------------

Some leading U.S. universities, including Duke and NYU Stern, have
created cryptocurrency-related courses in graduate business[^11] or
finance[^12] programs. One of the classes at UC Berkeley is cross-listed
in 3 departments; Computer Science, Business, and Law[^13].

The topics have become particularly relevant to finance programs as ICO
financing continues to increase[^14]. And the topics have recently
become even more important to finance programs affiliated with the
CFA[^15]. The CFA has been particularly active in publishing on
cryptocurrency topics[^16] and will be adding topics on blockchain and
cryptocurrency to the Level I and Level II curriculums in 2019[^17].

Many leading MBA programs have added courses or are in the process of
adding courses to their curriculums. Kevin Webach, a professor at the
University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School said "There will be a real
phenomenon in business for the foreseeable future, and five years down
the road there won\'t be too many major business schools that don\'t
offer similar classes."[^18].

Online Open Enrollment Paid Programs
------------------------------------

There is also a huge market for online, independent learning in the
field, apart from traditional degree-granting institutions. In addition
to free online courses, companies such as Udemy[^19]^,^ [^20] and
Blockgeeks[^21] are booming with many dozens of paid online courses
related to blockchain and cryptocurrency. Traditional institutions such
as MIT[^22], the London School of Economics[^23] and Oxford[^24] are
also offering paid online courses in cryptocurrency investing.

Summary
-------

Blockchain and Cryptocurrencies are important new topics for which the
educational demand is very strong and growing, in both traditional and
non-traditional academic programs.

August 2018 Updates
-------------------

On August 28, 2018 Coinbase research published a report with the results
of a survey that they had done of the top 50 universities worldwide.
(<https://blog.coinbase.com/the-rise-of-crypto-in-higher-education-81b648c2466f>)

They found that 42% of those top universities worldwide, and a higher
percentage of those top US universities, were offering cryptocurrency
courses. A number of leading US universities were offering multiple
courses, and typically the demand exceeded course capacity.

And on August 31, Cointelegraph published an article noting that the
cryptocurrency job market had continued to show increases regardless of
price volatility.
(<https://cointelegraph.com/news/blockchain-job-industry-sees-sustained-uptick-despite-volatile-crypto-markets>)

[^1]: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/02/08/technology/cryptocurrencies-come-to-campus.html

[^2]: https://www.coursera.org/learn/cryptocurrency/

[^3]: http://bitcoinbook.cs.princeton.edu/

[^4]: https://cmu.app.box.com/s/zjvqn8ne12sjwqmtvev2w49s78ij5sm5/file/165955147437

[^5]: https://crypto.stanford.edu/cs251/syllabus.html

[^6]: http://www.cs.jhu.edu/\~abhishek/classes/CS601-641-441-Spring2018/class.html

[^7]: http://www.baldimtsi.com/teaching/cs795\_sp17

[^8]: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1HN-I0\_u0smAtxupM3vP9GWVsRVYB1f\_oVG0f2oLUU88/edit

[^9]: https://www.ft.com/content/2d161cf6-c3b1-11e7-b30e-a7c1c7c13aab

[^10]: https://www.coindesk.com/consensus-2017-even-academics-cant-keep-pace-with-blockchain-change/

[^11]: https://faculty.fuqua.duke.edu/\~charvey/Teaching/897\_2018/897\_Topics.htm

[^12]: http://pages.stern.nyu.edu/\~dyermack/courses/Hinkes-Yermack%20Spring%202018.pdf

[^13]: https://berkeley-blockchain.github.io/cs294-144-s18/

[^14]: https://cryptovalley.swiss/wp-content/uploads/20180628\_PwC-S-CVA-ICO-Report\_EN.pdf

[^15]: https://www.cfainstitute.org/about/universities/university-affiliation

[^16]: https://blogs.cfainstitute.org/investor/2018/04/03/cryptocurrencies-the-rise-of-decentralized-money/

[^17]: https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-07-16/cfa-exam-adds-crypto-blockchain-topics-as-wall-street-dives-in

[^18]: https://www.cnbc.com/2018/04/05/top-mba-programs-beef-up-cyrptocurrency-courses-to-keep-up-with-demand.html

[^19]: https://www.udemy.com/courses/search/?q=blockchain&src=sac&kw=blockchain

[^20]: https://www.udemy.com/courses/search/?q=cryptocurrency&src=sac&kw=cryptocurrency

[^21]: https://blockgeeks.com/

[^22]: https://executive.mit.edu/openenrollment/program/blockchain-technologies-business-innovation-and-application/\#.W18oplBKiM8

[^23]: https://onlinelearning.lse.ac.uk/lse-cryptocurrency-investment-and-disruption-online-certificate-course-hm/

[^24]: https://www.udemy.com/cryptocurrency-investing/
